# Multilevel Alignment and Iliadic Texts
## Section 1: Introduction
There are 1000 years between us and the Venetus A, the oldest complete manuscript of the Iliad. There are another 1000 years between the Venetus A and the oldest surviving papyrus fragments of the poem, themselves yet a third 1000 years older than the origins of the poem. As a result of the Iliad’s great age and enduring cultural prominence, the text possesses a uniquely complex history of transmission. I intend to use the tools of the Homer Multitext Project and its teams to build out a reading environment integrating the poetic text, an aligned prose paraphrase, and annotated commentary, all in Ancient Greek. The Iliadic text will come from the vulgate Iliad available through the Perseus Digital Library, the prose paraphrase from MSS Omega 1.12. English translations are taken in the case of the poetic text from the Perseus Digital Library and in the case of paraphrase from my own translation.  The primary goal of this project is to aid both beginning and advanced readers of Homer gain insights into the poem’s text and transmission, while demonstrating the universality of tools, untied to any single edition or attestation.
Beginning with a transcription, translation, and alignment of Book 10, this project will work to prepare a complete edition of the Byzantine paraphrase, aligned with the Ducat tool and use those alignments to discuss the nature of the relationship between Greek to Greek translation as well as Greek to English translation. Furthermore, this project will make the Ducat tool more robust and accessible to other scholarly projects and teams. 
Three primary goals:
1.	Edit and translate a previously unedited text (the prose paraphrase of the Iliad)
2.	Make use of alignment tools to facilitate analysis of the relationship between poem and paraphrase, as well as English translations of the same. 
3.	Test Ducat and find ways to make it more broadly applicable.
## Section 2: Omega 1.12
Omega 1.12 is an 11th Cent. MSS comprised of 219 folios, likely made in Constantinople. The poetic text and prose paraphrase are not the only texts included in the manuscript.  The Iliad text begins on 7r and continues through the remained of the manuscript, with 37 lines of poetry on each page.  The poem is copied in the left column and the prose paraphrase on the right. Each paraphrase begins with a one line metrical summary of the book. 
The scribe always begins a new book on the recto of the folio. This leads to a seamless transition between books in most cases, but not all 24 books have lengths that permit beginning on a recto and ending on a verso. Given the value of space in the book, the scribe does not leave the versos devoid of poetic text blank. Instead, he provides another reading aid, a brief hypothesis of the upcoming book. These hypotheses are not uncommon features in manuscripts of this type and offer a truncated one page summary of the next book. Thus in the initial spread of nine books , there exist four different versions of the story: the poetic text, the prose paraphrase, the metrical summary, and the hypothesis on the facing page.
Another interesting feature of the manuscript is the presence of outdents, both in red and black ink in the poetic text and prose paraphrase.  These organizational units offer further insights into the scholars understanding of the poem and the way in which he is organizing the paraphrase. For example, the entire Shield of Achilles episode in Book 18, the extend ekphrasis where Hephaestus depicts scenes on the shield is a single paragraph, (18.462-18.617, 163v-165v) . Conversely, the shortest paragraph in the poem is 16.1-16.4, a mere 4 lines on 137r. Alignments with the outdented paragraphs as tokens will yield valuable insights into the ways the scribes think about the Iliad and make thematic organizations of their text. 
The paraphrase also includes outdented paragraph markers, but they occur on different lines than the Iliadic paragraphs. The paraphrase paragraphs have not yet been thoroughly documented It is one of the long-term goals of this project to fully transcribe the paraphrase and analyze the ways in which the Iliadic and paraphrase paragraphs align. 
This project is a subset of the larger Homer Multitext project and represents the first efforts to transcribe and translate the prose paraphrase for a 21st century audience. As such, one of the primary tasks, and by far the most time consuming aspect of the project is transcribing the paraphrase. The scribe does make use of standard abbreviations, especially for case endings, but one of the great joys and perils of paleographic work is the places where abbreviations or letter-forms are less familiar. Fortunately, the poetic text and the paraphrase are written in the same hand and therefore, it is possible to search within the poetic text for similar scribal choices. This is also particularly useful in the occasional places where the paraphrase uses the same word as the Iliadic text. 
 
Fig 1. Omega 1.12 85r. A typical page in the MSS with the Iliad text, prose paraphrase and marginal commentary.
## Section 3: Ducat, its Benefits, and Drawbacks
The alignment tool for this project is Ducat: Child of Ugarit, developed by Chris Blackwell of Furman University. Using CTS URNs and tokenized versions of the selected texts, the tool makes it quick and easy to make complete many-to-many alignments. Tokens may be expanded or contracted according to the scholar’s determination, offering a range of granularities with which to view the text. Given the paragraphication of both the poetic text and the prose paraphrase, the flexibility of tokenization and citation is particularly valuable for this project. 
The greatest benefit of Ducat is the ability for tokens to exist in multiple alignment groups. This functionality is what sets Ducat apart from Ugarit and brings it into a more useful context for work. Even though the prose paraphrase and its translation closely follow the poetic text, there is variation and variation in such a way not only that the text is expanded or contracted, but also that there is overlap from token to token. This can most readily be seen when working with larger tokens: sentence or paragraph level analyses, where there is a distinction drawn between a prose sentence and a sequence of poetic lines (Fig #). But it is also useful when making word level alignments, especially for texts in translation, as a translator will make certain nuanced decisions and considerations for the target language. The value of multiple alignment groups cannot be overstated. 
 
Figure 2. A sentence-level alignment between the poetic text and prose paraphrase. Note the six Iliadic lines that align with the single paraphrase sentence. Note also the overlap between the second paraphrase token and the second half of 10.6.
 
Figure 3. A word-level alignment demonstrating the tendency of the paraphrase to expand and explicate the Iliadic text.
Translation of the paraphrase in preparation for alignment results in a document specifically suited to the task: a word for word translation that closely follows the structure of the original Greek text. While that makes alignment easier, it does not fully demonstrate the flexibility and agility of the Ducat system. To that end, the alignments for the project are actually done across four documents: a standard Greek edition, an open license translation, the paraphrase transcription, and my own translation of the paraphrase. The utility of Ducat across editions and languages is best demonstrated by a combination of bespoke editions and long-standing ones. From there, it is easy to see the benefits that can emerge when dealing with texts that exhibit a much higher degree of multiformity than our Homeric canon. 
Ducat is not without its drawbacks, however. Given the infancy of the tool, it is not yet fully optimized for ease of use. The CEX files required for alignment must be prepared by hand to a certain degree. At a sentence-level it is not the most inconvenient task, but it does open the user to numerous errors, which must then be corrected and recorrected until they are valid and useable within the system. Scholars coming to the tool with XML or Plain Text files will find more work in preparing their texts than they may wish. Fortunately, one of the primary goals of the project is to identify and improve the minor problems of Ducat in order to make the tool more user-friendly.
Indeed, the easiest task of the project is making the actual alignments. After transcribing and correcting the paraphrase, translating and rechecking against the poetic text, preparing and adjusting CEX files, the researcher has read the entire text at least three times and often more. At that point, the benefits of Ducat once again shine through and the work passes quickly. Exporting the alignment groups is easily done and produces a CEX file that may be reloaded within the system for the next alignment session.
## Section 4: Initial Results Part 1: Book 10
Given the controversial standing of Book 10 among Homerists , it seemed an ideal place to begin a thorough study of the intersection between the poetic text and the paraphrase. The various arguments for and about Book 10 are beyond the scope of this report, but Due and Ebbot (DATE) address the matter thoroughly. Suffice to say, Book 10 is an especial curiosity. Furthermore, there is value in beginning in the middle of the manuscript rather than near the beginning, if for no other reason than that by that point the scribe has settled into whatever habits they will use for the whole work. 
The primary goal of the paraphrase seems to be simplification of the lexical variety and grammatical structures for the ease of the reader. In essence, it is the No Fear Shakespeare version of the Iliad for Byzantine readers. For example, in the opening lines of Book 10, the entire Greek army, save Agamemnon is asleep. Their sleep is mentioned explicitly twice in the opening four lines. The poetic text μαλακῷ … ὕπνῳ (in blessed sleep) in the first place (10.2) and ὕπνος … γλυκερὸς (sweet sleep) in the second (10.4). The paraphrase, in both cases, reads τῷ ἡδεὶ ὑπνῷ (In pleasurable/sweet sleep). The paraphrase has an impulse toward lexical simplification and this is a prime example of the translator’s choice. There is no inclination toward nuance nor any metrical demand and so the scribe uses the same adjective. This is useful for readers, but also offers insights into Greek lexica and the ways the Byzantine scribes thought about word meaning. Look at how a word is used and you will know what it means. Look also at how a word is translated by experts and you will begin to get a sense of what it means.
Similar lexical changes to those exhibited in 10.2 and 10.4  occur throughout the paraphrase, both with ordinary phrases and with proper nouns. While it may seem odd to make changes to the proper nouns when translating from poem to paraphrase, recognizing that this is done to avoid ethnic inclusion explains the choice. This is a change which occurs primarily in one case: the names of the attacking army. The Greek warriors are described in a variety of ways in the poem, called Danaans and Achaeans, but in the paraphrase they are only ever referred to as Hellenes. This choice on the part of the paragraph translator seems to reflect both the nature of the world in which he is writing and also a divorce from the metrical, ethnic, and cultural distinctions that would have played a role in the use of terms like Danaan and Achaean when the poem was composed. Conversely, the paraphrase uses both Ilium and Troy to describe the city, perhaps reflecting a distancing between the scribe and the Trojan warriors, rather than a unifying impulse that can be read in the use of Hellenes at every mention of the attacking army. 
Conversely, where Danaans and Achaeans and other names for the Greek armies are consistently translated at Hellenes, there are other names which actually get expanded, in order to facilitate reading comprehension. For example, in the first nature simile of Book 10, beginning at 10.5, the poem has one word, πόσις, referring to Zeus in his context as the spouse of beautiful-haired Hera. The paraphrase expands that word to three: ὁ τῆς καλλικόμου Ἥρας ἀνὴρ Ζεὺς, making the relationship explicit with the more common word ὁ ἀνὴρ and its article, as well as making clear that the husband is Zeus. It would be absurd to suggest that the readers of this edition, though Christian, would be unfamiliar with Zeus, considering the context of reading the poem and paraphrase in conversation with each other. A better interpretation of this choice is that the nature simile is specifically interested in Zeus and Zeus as a performer of actions. He is the subject. Therefore, by naming him explicitly, the translator has solidified the connection between the deity and his sphere of influence, rather than the more roundabout way the poetic text introduces the simile. This example is highlighted in Figure 3 (Section 3) in order to demonstrate the benefits of word level alignment, as well as this tendency to expand names. The example at 10.5 is not the only such case on 85r, in several cases (10.4, 10.19), patronyms are expanded from single words to multi-word phrases. This is as with all the examples in this section, a choice the translator is making in order to facilitate reader use. 
But not all changes are made for the simplification of the text. Some of the translator’s choices do not have a determined rationale. Rather, the initial results do not provide a rationale for this choice. An example of this change is in one of the epithets of Menelaus. In the poem he is frequently “Menelaus, good at the war shout”, but the paraphrase translates the epithet as “Menelaus, born to battle”, an entirely different sentiment. The paraphrase is unbound by the strictures of meter, and therefore would have little apparent reason to make the change, but it is not only at 10.36 where the change is made, but throughout the paraphrase. This may represent a variant tradition or is simply a choice of the translator. Further transcription, translation, and alignment of the paraphrase will undoubtedly shed some light on the matter. 
## Section 5: Initial Results Part 1: Bronze and Iron
While Book 10 is interesting in its own right and a valuable starting point for editing the prose paraphrase, the folios chose offer another opportunity as well: the chance to examine individual words and phrases as they appear throughout the manuscript. It is not enough to not the formulaic style of the paraphrase on two pages if that choice is no systematic. Nor does it say much when the translator is inconsistent in his word choices. The core understanding of this project is that the paraphrase was produced in order to facilitate reading the poetic text. This thesis is best supported by systematic choices made by the translator and consistent work. The simplification of the text discussed above (Section 4) is one example of this trend, but it is not the only one exhibited on 85r. A prominent example of a difference made in the paraphrase text from the poetic text is the systematic translation of χαλκός (bronze) and its derivatives to σίδηρος (iron) and its derivatives. 
The opening lines of Book 10 contain two parallel arming scenes, first Agamemnon and then Menelaus prepare for their council by donning armor and animal skins, as well as taking up weapons. Our concern is with Menelaus who, in the poetic text puts on a bronze helmet, (Citation) and in the corresponding section of the paraphrase, the helmet has been transmuted to one of iron. While that is an interesting choice in isolation, if it were a slip of the pen in one location it would not say anything interesting about the choices of the paraphrase translator. It is not, however, an isolated phenomenon and is instead present throughout the manuscript. The paraphrase translator not only converts every Iliadic instance of bronze to iron, he also makes the change when translating compound words and formulae which make use of bronze. Consider (bronze-clad), a common epithet for the Achaeans, which the paraphrase renders as (iron-armored) in every case. 
The translation of bronze to iron is the only such metallurgical change. The mentions of iron in the Iliad text remain iron in the paraphrase.  Similarly, gold remains gold, and the same for silver, tin, and lead. These are the only metals named in the poem. The translation seems to be a modernizing effort on the part of the translator. While gold, silver, tin, and lead would be been used in a similar form or fashion when the paraphrase was written, bronze was no longer the primary work metal, having been supplanted by iron for several millennia. The modernizing decision would not be a factor for any metal other than bronze and iron. This does have an interesting effect in one episode: the funeral games of Patroclus. There the iron talent is preserved, but in the midst of so much iron throughout the paraphrase, it loses the cache and value that its rarity presents in the original text. Given, however, that the primary goals of the paraphrase seem to be lexical and grammatical simplicity for the reader’s ease, an unconcern with that nuance is unsurprising. The phenomenon is not unprecedented in Byzantine manuscripts of the Iliad. Consider, for example, the illustrations in the opening folios of the Venetus A, the oldest complete manuscript of the Iliad. Particularly moving is the illustration on 2r (Figure 4), where Helen is depicted in the garb of a Byzantine queen. The modernizing effects of reception, both for familiarity and aesthetic is not uncommon, and in fact, makes the text more accessible to the intended audience. 
 

Figure 4. Venetus A 2r: Helen in the garb of a Byzantine queen.
There are doubtless many other cases similar to the treatment of bronze and iron throughout the paraphrase. Bearing that in mind, completing the transcription and alignment of the paraphrase will yield considerable value for our understanding of the relationship between Byzantine scholars and the predecessors as well as the relationship between text and translation and the tools we use to model that relationship. Bronze and iron are the beginning, just as Book 10 is the beginning. Further work will demand more time. 
## Section 6: Future Work and the Three Year Plan
Appreciating that this project cannot be completed in the span of several months, a discussion of the three year time-frame and the long-term goals of the project is helpful for understanding the next steps forward. This work will involve both the manuscript itself and the Ducat tool as an independent entity with broad applications for a variety of projects. The incomplete transcription of the paraphrase and demonstrating the utility of Ducat for projects with higher degrees of multiformity are the primary goals of this project. 
Dealing first with the ongoing work on Omega 1.12, it is clear that more work will yield exponential benefits. With so much revealed solely from the analyses of Book 10, a complete transcription of the paraphrase will yield unforeseen insights into the text of the Iliad and its reception, as well as producing a readable text for students of the poem. It is after all, designed to facilitate readership. Furthermore, a complete transcription will make machine analyses of the paraphrase possible. The simplest and most profoundly useful example is the ability to make queries of the paraphrase text. In its current incomplete form, the paraphrase is not easily searchable. Take, for example, the use-case discussed above (Section 5). While it is easy to see all of the places where the paraphrase has translated χαλκός as σίδηρος, it is not possible to see if there is any place within the paraphrase where the translator uses χαλκός in any form. Rather, it is not possible without reading the entire text, by which point a failure to transcribe would be a gross misuse of time. 
A similar, but not identical, issue is also raised on 85r. The poetic text of lines 10.16-10.17 read thus:
		ὑψόθ᾽ ἐόντι Διί, μέγα δ᾽ ἔστενε κυδάλιμον κῆρ.
		ἥδε δέ οἱ κατὰ θυμὸν ἀρίστη φαίνετο βουλὴ
The paraphrase translates the two lines:
		μεγάλως καὶ ἐστέναζεν ἡ συνετὴ ψυχή· 
		αὕτη καὶ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν ψυχὴν καλλίστη ἐφαίνετο ἡ βουλή· 
Note the use of κῆρ and θυμὸς in the Iliad text. Both words are rendered as ψυχή in the paraphrase. While this is similar to the lexical simplification that occurs with ὁ ἡδὺ¨ς ὕπνος (Section 4), the charged nature of κῆρ, θυμὸς, and ψυχή. It would be possible to examine all the places in the Iliad text where the poet uses κῆρ, θυμὸς, or ψυχή, as was done with χαλκός and σίδηρος, but that has the potential to obscure what other words in the Iliad text that the paraphrase translator chose to render as ψυχή. Further work on the project would complete transcription and alignment of the entire paraphrase, allowing queries of the text and discussions about how many Iliadic lemmata are translated in the same way by the paraphrase author.  
Given the controversies around Book 10, one useful tool and application for both the poetic text and the paraphrase is the creation of topic models in order to examine the underlying structures of the text. Given that the topics remain the same from document to document in a corpus, but vary in the degree to which topics are represented in each document, an examination of the topic models for Book 10 will allow thorough analysis of the book’s authorship and the degree to which it exists within the broader Homeric canon. Comparisons between topic models for both the poetic text and prose paraphrase will offer further insights into the degree of lexical variation in the texts and thematic unity. Further analyses on both the alignment groups and topic models will offer richer insights, especially as the paraphrase transcription is completed. 
A valuable next step for applications of the Ducat tool would be aligning the hypothesis on 84v with the Iliad text and the prose paraphrase. While this doesn’t exhibit extreme multiformity, the condensing effect of the summary offers interesting avenues for alignment. A single sentence of the hypothesis would align with many lines in both the poem and the paraphrase. Despite the overlap inherent to sentence level alignments, the hypothesis is an even more truncated version of the narrative and therefore even more prone to overlap across tokens. While there is an argument to be made in support of word level alignments and the hyper-specificity they allow, the huge alignment groupings such an approach would require is absurd and would outweigh the relatively minor benefits. Since Ducat allows tokens to exist in multiple alignments, there is no major impulse to focus on hyper granularity. Instead, the overlap can offer insights into the different ways the poem, paraphrase, and hypothesis organize the narrative. 
## Section 7: Concluding Thoughts
From even the first beginnings of work editing and aligning the prose paraphrase of MSS Omega 1.12, fascinating revelations have already been uncovered. The possibility of doing this work at scale offers even further benefits, both expected and as of yet unforeseen. Yet, even more importantly, this project is a stepping stone to countless other projects through the use and optimization of the Ducat tool. Works which display even more complicated textual histories and variation across editions will doubtless put the tool to good use. Therefore, it is a work of the greatest importance to expand and continue this project’s brief and its prominence in a broader scholarly community. For the sake paraphrase and for the sake of the countless other texts that have limited availability and unlimited potential.
For work in progress, please examine the project’s GitHub repository:
https://github.com/Eumaeus/Tufts_Furman_Omega112

## Bibliography
Dué, Casey, and Mary Ebbott. 2010. Iliad 10 and the Poetics of Ambush: A Multitext Edition with Essays and Commentary. Hellenic Studies Series 39. Washington, DC: Center for Hellenic Studies.
Dué, C., “Escorialensis Ω.1.12,” The Homer Multitext, first published 2014. 



